So, friends, we have finished the first chapter,
we have defined the main parameters of planning,
and now we are moving directly to the planning process.
First of all, we are engaged in forecasting the money flows.
In general, planning of finances,
strategic, operational, tactical,
is the final stage of planning
of the entire business activity.
In order to make a financial plan,
we need the data of the marketing plan,
production plan, organizational plans,
and all other types of business plans.
But to follow the composition of these plans,
usually in parallel,
since it is necessary to ensure feedback,
to take into account the production realities,
and, on the contrary,
to make adjustments to the management plans
according to the parameters of the financial planning.
Financial planning is based on the concept of money flows.
You remember this scheme,
this is the basic scheme of German financial management.
This scheme allows us to look at the enterprise
in a relationship with other enterprises.
The scheme of money flows.
Here we see how the enterprise is connected
with other enterprises in the markets of production,
in the markets of purchases.
We have a state, we have financial markets
from which the enterprise receives loans,
and all this is aimed at one task,
to ensure the continuity of money flows.
We need to ensure liquidity.
Therefore, in the planning phase,
we first link commodity flows with financial flows
and provide for all the upcoming payment obligations
to be paid in due time
to suppliers, to creditors,
to employees of the enterprise on the salary,
of course, to the state.
Thus, the task is to cover all possible deficits in due time
or, again, we do not forget that money should work,
so we provide for the effective use of free financial resources,
of surplus.
The planning process involves a certain sequence,
certain steps of planning.
In general, they are universal and go in one scheme.
First of all, we need to consider all commodity flows.
What commodity flows we have from the markets of purchases,
what resources we buy,
how much, with what frequency,
and, accordingly, we must determine how much financial funds
will be needed for this in the financial planning.
We must develop an investment plan,
additional investments if we plan to expand activity
or, in general, investments if we create a new enterprise.
In parallel with the investment plan,
accordingly, we have an amortization calculation plan.
Then we must calculate the cost of revenue
and calculate the cost for this revenue.
In addition, when growing revenue,
we must take into account that we will need
some additional investments,
investments in reserves.
This is the sphere of turnover calculations,
pure turnover capital.
After that, we can start
directly forming the main document of financial planning,
the table of money flows.
Well, first we can conditionally call this table
the table of real commodity exchange.
Here we apply only the positions
associated with the movement of goods,
namely, revenue, cost,
the purchase of necessary machines, equipment,
the creation of stock of return funds.
The result of this table shows us
the need for financing.
This table is necessarily made up
for the entire horizon of planning
with a breakdown of planning steps.
We are talking about a forecast document,
a document that is made up for several years,
at least 5 years, 3-5 years,
and is broken down into smaller planning steps.
In the simplest form, this is according to the years.
Sometimes the features of planning,
the features of the enterprise's activities
can imply quarterly planning.
Even forecast planning
is a breakdown by quarters.
We see that this table reflects all the flows
and outflows of funds that are necessary
for the maintenance of operational processes,
real commodity exchange processes.
Here is the sequence of components.
Revenue from implementation,
which comes to us from the marketing plan,
how many goods, what price we produce,
is reflected in the revenue,
and the cost of the budget,
the cost of the cost of the budget,
is calculated.
Next, we determine the need for investment.
That is, the manufacturers calculate
the number of machines.
We calculate the money we need
to purchase the main resources
and to create a supply of return funds.
And finally, this table,
when we put the funding sources,
provides liquidity.
That is, the net cash flow is not negative.
This is the parameter
that guarantees the profitability of our business
along with increasing profitability
and profitability,
the growth of the business's cost.
This kind of table is simplified,
but it allows us to summarize
and show the interconnection
of all inflows and outflows of funds.
In practice, they are more often
in a slightly different form.
They divide the cash flows
in the sphere of their occurrence,
highlighting operational,
investment and financial activity.
This is a detailed scheme of cash flows
in an electronic textbook.
I ask you to carefully understand this scheme.
It shows all accounting realities
and the correspondence of these flows
and the primary sources,
what it means in accounting language
and where the primary information
is located.
This table shows the inflows and outflows
of funds and the financial result of the net cash flow.
This is nothing more than a direct method
of forecasting cash flows.
I think it is very convenient and clear.
The main goal of this table
is not to miss any of the components
of the cash flows.
In addition to the direct method
of forecasting cash flows,
the broad spread received
a indirect method of forecasting cash flows.
That is, when we deduce
our resulting indicator,
the net cash flow,
from the data of other financial documents.
In a very simplified concept,
the net cash flow is calculated
from the total net profit,
depreciation deductions,
as well as the change in debt,
plus or minus the credit and debit debt.
These quantities are calculated
at any enterprise
according to accounting or planned forms,
form 1 and form 2.
Most companies use the indirect method
because it is easy to use.
If you look at the financial reports
of international companies,
you will see that after the main positions
there is a turnover, a profit,
and a cash flow.
This is exactly what we get
in the process of financial planning.
In addition, I want to remind you
that cash flows and horizon of planning
are a matter of time.
The cash flows we receive
and pay out at different times
are not equal to us.
The later we get the financial result,
the less interesting it is for us.
I remind you about discounting,
about how to provide data compatibility.
If we want to calculate the financial result
by the growing result,
by summing up the net cash flow by years,
we do not have the right to do this directly
by adding up the net cash flow
of the first period of 100 units,
adding up the net cash flow
of the second period of 100 units,
these units are not equal to each other.
Before adding them up,
we need to discount them.
In total, the discounted amount of the cash flow
is equal to the total discounted value
of the current value
that summarizes the financial result
of the activity during all periods of planning.
This indicator is usually necessary
for the new enterprise.
We are now starting to calculate
the investment needs.
We should remember that this is
the investment in the property,
in the assets of the enterprise.
Investments are used in the capital,
the connection of capital in production,
the acquisition of property.
On the diagram you can see
the investment classification
and the division of investments
into real and financial investments.
Real investments are strategic decisions
that determine in the forecast plan
what capital is needed
to purchase buildings,
structures, machines and equipment,
and what capital is needed
to create or increase stocks.
Financial investments are planned
as long-term investments
in other enterprises,
acquisitions of shares of another enterprise.
Or we can plan short-term investments
in short-term financial securities.
We plan short-term investments,
that is, the acquisition of short-term financial securities.
Accordingly, in the balance sheet, they are reflected as short-term financial investments in the second section of the balance sheet.
The calculation of investment needs
includes the assessment of the necessary
capital, the total cost of the necessary
equipment, machines, structures,
vehicles and other assets.
These calculations are calculated
in the production plan
as part of the justification
of production capacity.
They are connected with the established
strategy of the enterprise
and are used in the final form.
The only thing we pay attention to
is the correct planning
and calculation of amortization calculations.
The next component of investment
is the turnover capital.
It is the most important part
of the strategic financial planning.
The turnover capital
is the most important part
of the strategic financial planning.
Why do we need it?
It is a barrier
between the perception of this concept
and the mixing of the turnover capital
with the current activity,
with direct acquisition
and with the writing of raw materials.
The turnover capital
should be minimally necessary
but sufficient.
If we create unnecessary reserves,
it will affect the efficiency
of our activities.
A shortage of reserves
can lead to breakdowns.
The turnover capital
should be minimally necessary
but sufficient.
The situation of the turnover capital
is the absence of stock in the warehouse,
the absence of a position in the trading room,
the absence of fresh bread every day
or the absence of money for payment from the accounts.
The importance of the turnover capital
should be remembered
because it is the main factor
that determines the value of the project.
The turnover capital increases
when the enterprise develops.
The reserves of the enterprise increase
and certain funds are needed.
It should be remembered
that the turnover capital
can exceed the main capital
if the enterprise develops.
The calculation of the turnover capital
follows the plan of revenue
and the cost-benefit ratio.
We use the existing data
such as the revenue,
the cost of the finished product
and the cost of the material costs.
These are the main parameters
that we take from the strategic plan.
We take the annual cost from the meta
and remember that we have 360 days per year.
According to these data,
we proceed to the planning of the turnover capital,
sequentially moving from each position
of the current assets.
We start planning the reserves
and the cost of the finished product.
The quantity of the material and the resources
depends on the supply interval.
For example,
if we receive materials every 10 days,
it means that we have to form reserves
for these 10 days.
Therefore, we take the material costs
from the cost of the finished product
and the cost of the finished product
and the cost of the material resources
and the cost of the material resources.
In other words,
the turnover capital
will work in the resources of the resources.
The next component is the unfinished product.
This is a component
that is only for production companies.
For commercial companies,
this is a component
that is only for production companies.
The cost of the unfinished product
depends on the production cycle.
For example,
we have 15 days.
I will insert specific numbers
so that it is more clear.
The cost of the unfinished product
depends on the material costs
and the cost of the finished product.
The cost of the unfinished product
depends on the material costs
and the cost of the finished product.
The next component of the turnover assets
is the debitor's debt,
which is formed due to the fact
that we provide a delay to our buyers.
Accordingly,
we do not receive some part of the revenue
as much as we give a delay.
As much as we give a delay.
For example, 30 days.
Next, we can plan
the minimum necessary remainder
of the finished product in the warehouse.
For example,
we have a store for 3 days.
This also means
that we do not sell it immediately
and, accordingly, do not receive the revenue.
All these intervals of time
are interconnected.
We put here nothing but points
that make up segments of the financial cycle.
All these standards work
and determine the amount of turnover capital.
The more these management standards,
the more turnover capital.
If we sum up the resulting component,
the calculated component,
we get the total amount
of turnover capital
produced in the warehouse.
The turnover capital is the capital
that must be invested in our stocks.
the turnover capital is the capital
But, of course, you immediately thought
that in addition to the fact
that we provide a delay,
we are also provided with a delay.
We have a credit debt
and we will pay for it 45 days later.
And for financial planning,
we are interested in the amount
of net working capital.
This is the amount
that shows us
the amount of money
that is needed for investment
together with the main capital.
The less the net turnover capital,
the shorter the financial cycle of the enterprise.
The financial cycle is a normative one.
It is an operational cycle
and after 45 days
we have a 13-day financial cycle.
The shorter the financial cycle,
the faster the turnover,
the more significant the financial results.
In addition to this scrupulous method
of calculating the turnover capital
by all components,
we can calculate the turnover capital
by the turnover capital that has been formed.
We can calculate the turnover capital
In addition to this,
there is another method
of calculating the turnover capital
that is calculated at $100 per turnover.
If we have this normative,
we can multiply any planned annual turnover
by this normative
by adjusting the number of days in the period
and calculate the value of our turnover capital.
This is a similar calculation,
but here we determine
the separate costs
and the separate costs
for $100 of revenue.
According to the accounting,
it is easy to calculate the costs of raw materials,
amortization, and other expenses.
And we can set the same standards
for storing raw materials in the warehouse,
the time of production,
the storage of products in the warehouse,
and get the total cost of stocks
and the normative of the turnover capital
for $100 of revenue.
You can use any method.
The point is not to forget
to take into account the need for turnover capital.
This is the main problem.
Why does the enterprise have no money?
This is the first problem that arises.
It shows that all components are not taken into account.
All components are taken into account incorrectly.
The components are not thought out,
or the normative was taken into account during planning,
but in reality, the situation has changed
and no operational measures have been taken.
I want to emphasize the importance
of calculating turnover capital.
I want to emphasize that turnover capital is very mobile and variable.
It is the first component that reacts to any changes
in the market or within the company.
The need to calculate turnover capital
and monitor business activity
should be the basis of the work of financial services.
To monitor, it is necessary to regularly
monitor the balance of turnover funds,
monitor the warning options
and break-downs in any position.
There may be problems with the suppliers,
or something is not in order in production.
Or the finished product is stored in the warehouse,
so it is necessary to put the marketing in order.
I would like to draw your attention to the financial indicators.
These are external indicators
that easily react and show the situation
at our company.
They are followed by a system of organization
of production processes,
ensuring the production of products.
But, of course,
the head of the warehouse does not understand
what the cost of stock is.
But he understands well
that the delivery interval is 10 days.
Therefore, this parameter should be voiced.
Unfinished production is a financial
and economic parameter for the organizers
of production.
It is not clear, but 15 days
is the norm for which the head of the warehouse
or the head of the warehouse
is responsible for the production.
This is a purely financial parameter
and requires a lot of work,
meticulous work, regular work
with suppliers and customers.
This includes monitoring the reliability
of customers, the reliability of suppliers,
the payment ability of customers,
whether the supplier can withstand
the regularity of the delivery.
And you want to provide the supplier
with goods with a payment delay.
The more you provide the suppliers
with the editor's post,
the longer the delay period
is, the more the cost of delivery
is.
The more the cost of delivery
is, the longer the delay period
is, the longer the cost of delivery
is.
The turnover is an indicator of business
activity. If business activity increases,
the turnover is released.
If there is a slowdown in the process,
a new infusion is required
in any of these components.
So, we have determined how much money
will be needed to purchase equipment,
how much will be needed to create
or increase the stock of turnover
for the accepted program.
Now we must determine the sources
of funding.
Please see the slide
with the information about the source
of funding.
Please see the slide with the information
about the source
of funding.
Please see the slide with the information
about the source
It is important to separate the source of capital from the external and internal sources of capital.
External sources are those that come to our enterprise from outside,
and internal sources are those that are formed during the enterprise's activities.
Here is an interesting example.
The accumulated profit is the component of the capital itself,
the so-called self-financing, the internal source of financing.
An interesting position is the debt on taxes and fees, the internal source of financing.
The effect of financing here is that these obligations are fulfilled with a certain delay.
The payments of the current period are reduced.
For example, the special value is the pension fund.
This is the component of the cost of this period.
It reduces the taxable profit of this period,
and is reimbursed within the next 15 days.
That is, within 15 days, we have some amount of funds
that will serve as a source of financing.
In this case, it is short-term financing.
A specific source of financing is the financing of the re-laying and changing of the asset structure.
We are talking about amortization.
As you know, amortization payments are intended to reimburse the cost of the worn-out equipment
after a certain period, after 10 years.
But today, this money, together with others,
can be used to finance some current needs.
Or even to finance the development, to buy new machines, equipment,
production areas, trading areas, without waiting for the wear of the old ones.
At the moment, this allows you to increase your revenue
and in 10 years, to earn money for replacing the worn-out equipment.
These components, the internal sources of financing,
are the highest qualifications of financial management.
Financial managers are forced to work every single penny.
Amortization is used to finance the reserve payments.
Debit debt is sold.
This is the position of the factoring of the sources of financing.
The division of the sources of financing into long-term and short-term is understandable.
For example, the long-term source of financing is, of course, the capital itself.
But the capital is divided into both long-term and short-term.
The long-term source of financing is, of course, the long-term loans.
The short-term source of financing is the debt of the creditor.
Short-term financing is the most frequently discussed,
more lively topic.
In order to resort to short-term financing,
you need to take into account the existing realities,
the possibility of obtaining short-term loans, their price.
In addition, there are formal requirements for bank institutions
for liquidity and turnover indicators.
These conditions for providing short-term loans can change
depending on the liquidity indicators.
The creditor considers liquidity indicators,
identifies less or more risky borrowers,
and increases the loan rate depending on this analysis.
The Russian reality today is a strict control of the amount of clean assets in the borrower's balance.
Financial support for creditors is a very interesting and profitable article in financing.
It is free financing.
Here, of course, it is necessary to clearly control the payment deadlines
of the creditors and debitors.
In order to ensure the level of the contract,
we provided favorable conditions for us.
For example, we did it in the account of the turnover capital.
There were 45 days and 30 days,
which gave us 15 days of opportunity, 15 days of advantage.
What else should be taken into account when we solve the issue of financing?
An important component for a financial manager
is the ability to save on tax payments.
In particular, simple mechanisms.
It should be remembered that interest on loans is included in the cost.
However, in our realities, this is limited to the limit of the refinancing rate of 10%.
This will reduce the taxable profit.
You can save on tax payments by accelerating amortization.
In general, accelerated amortization is a powerful tool for saving on taxes around the world.
It acquires slightly different forms.
Because a limited number of enterprises
has the opportunity to save by using accelerated amortization.
In particular, leasing.
Leasing is one of the most interesting and best laws.
It provides that leasing payments can be increased by three times.
In general, leasing is a powerful tool.
In addition to using leasing, we save on one-time costs,
on the purchase of leasing items, on the purchase of equipment.
From a financial point of view, it is very important to save on taxes.
Leasing payments in full, with accelerated amortization,
with interest on loans, with insurance contributions,
are included in the cost.
Thus, the taxable profit is reduced.
These are the civilized ways to save on tax payments
within the framework of the existing laws.
When we talk about determining the source of financing,
we must remember the well-known rules and principles of financing.
Let's look at the principles of financing.
The first one is the principle of economic value.
What does it mean?
The price at which we spend our financing.
The average cost of capital.
That is, we must attract the funds that we need for financing
with minimum costs.
And if we have free excess funds,
we must use them in a profitable way,
by investing in securities.
The principle of purposeful use of funds
is associated with the so-called golden rule of financing.
That is, long-term funds should be used
to purchase machines, equipment,
long-term property.
And short-term sources of financing are used
to finance current needs,
to cover cash outages.
This is a clear rule.
It is actually violated at every step.
And what happens?
Let's take a short-term loan
and buy a machine, equipment.
The source of repayment of loans is always
profit and depreciation.
Profit is an indicator that may not exist.
Depreciation is 10% per year.
Compare 10% and the interest rate for a short-term loan.
Let's recall the golden rule of financing.
Why is it so important?
If we use short-term loans with a rate of 20%
to purchase the main funds,
which have a 10% depreciation,
and there is a little profit,
we are pre-claiming ourselves
to be unpayable.
For the next turn,
for the next snowball,
we need new loans.
New loans, new loans,
new money.
The next principle of financing is
the independence of financing.
Of course, when we use loans,
we must somehow protect ourselves,
minimize our risk.
We also have a 50-50 rule.
We measure the volume of the loan
with our own funds.
Limiting the size of the business
to the size of our wallet,
as the Americans say.
Let me remind you again
that the security of financing
is related to ensuring financial stability.
We talked about this
and said that it is a cornerstone
of financial balance.
In connection with the price of financing,
the price of capital,
with balancing on the verge of risk and profitability,
we can give an example.
Let's say the expected return on shares
of the company is 14%,
and the obligation is less than 9%.
What does this mean in terms of risk?
A higher return on shares
means that they are more risky
if I want to purchase shares of this company.
In order to protect myself,
I am not inclined to risk,
I will purchase bonds.
On the management side,
on the contrary,
my own financing is considered less risky,
and therefore the managers are ready
to pay a higher price for capital shares.
The need for financing, we return to the sphere of our planning, directly to the planning processes,
shows a table of money flows.
This is negative net cash flow per saldo of investment and operational activities,
so to speak, negative saldo of the real sphere.
In order to cover these deficits and use certain sources of financing,
it is necessary to take into account certain components.
Please look at the slide, they are listed.
First, the presence and size of your own capital,
how much of your own money we can invest in the creation of an enterprise or its development.
On the other hand, the availability of credit financing,
is there an opportunity to get loans.
The conditions for lending arise, how much does it cost,
what kind of insurance is required for a loan,
do we have such an insurance.
The target parameter is the maximization of income for the shareholder on capital,
that is, the financial manager calculates the profitability of his own capital,
the action of the financial lever.
Financial investors are always interested in the moment of leaving the business,
how easy it is to leave the business,
at what stage can this company be sold,
at what stage of development this company,
for what price, will there be buyers.
It is always very interesting to provide flexibility in financing.
In any case, if we plan our sources of financing,
taking into account all these realities,
we must provide some kind of reserve,
if something goes wrong, as we planned,
it will be possible to change something.
For this, of course, money is needed.
The next rule is that banks are the institutions where you will be given money
when you do not need it.
Banks are willing to lend to companies that have enough money.
All these financing solutions form the target structure and the average capital price.
The contract planning of the table of money flows
is a very convenient tool for modeling sources of financing.
Here we see three standard options.
Payment of a single amount at the end of the lending period,
payment of equal amounts every year for 250 units,
and the third option is an annuity of payments with equal contributions.
For us, these orders and financing schedules are not indifferent.
We need to choose the one that is convenient for us.
Convenient from the point of view of money flows.
We refer to our table of money flows and look at how,
depending on how we expect the proceeds to come to us,
how we will pay,
what money flows we will generate in order to pay off the loan.
And accordingly, we choose any of these options,
the loan repayment schedule,
we agree with the lender and conclude our special schedule,
including, for example, the interest rate,
not from the first period, but after several periods.
This is especially important for large projects,
for investment projects, for projects in the creation of enterprises.
How can an enterprise that has been created today,
which will be built in 2-5 years,
start to pay off a loan today?
This is unrealistic.
Therefore, all these are possible options,
flexibility in financing and financing realities,
what we have, what opportunities we have today in the financial market.
In general, academically, and in life, this rule is very important,
whether to take a loan or not.
This strategic decision that top managers make
is related to the actions of the financial lever.
I have already mentioned this several times.
You know that the financial lever describes the profitability of its own capital.
It is associated with the model of profitability of its own capital,
which shows the dependence of the profitability of its own capital
on the profitability of assets and financial stability.
Please see, here we have nothing but the coefficient of financial autonomy.
And the financial lever, which talks about the possibilities of financing,
about the risks of financing, is involved in this model of profitability.
The goal of lending, the goal of activity in general,
is to increase the profitability of shareholders,
to increase the return on shareholder capital.
It can be achieved by a risky action,
risky from the point of view of financial stability,
by the decision to take an additional loan.
And this decision will be justified if our interest rate on the loan
exceeds the already achieved profitability of assets.
In this case, financial stability changes,
the share of its own capital is reduced,
the simplest setting, the simplest numbers can be seen.
And then we get the growth of the profitability of our own capital.
I will ask you to see the examples in the conspect, in the workbook,
to see the examples of calculations and modeling of loan calculations,
and to remember the actions of the financial lever,
the actions of the profitability model.
I ask you to analyze these tasks
and try to apply them to your reality,
to the activities of your companies,
and use them in your practice.
Our main goal is to help solve problems in business.
We analyze very popularly, very simply.
I try to give you such basics of financial planning,
because we have programs, complexes for financial planning, automation.
Of course, no one does anything by hand,
but in order to use all these tools correctly,
you need to understand what you want,
what are the final strategic parameters we want to get.
We always remember profitability and risk,
about two components.
Please, our profitability and risk of financial stability.
A little tour back to the topic that you have already passed in financial management,
the financial lever.
Thus, we use all the principles of financing,
all the rules of financing,
plus the availability of financial tools.
We have our reality,
whether we can or want to give us loans.
We choose a convenient financing scheme
suitable for our company from the point of view of expected inflows and outflows of funds.
What do we want to get from this financing?
We have achieved the strategic goal.
These issues are solved in the process of routine planning.
We choose a convenient, I emphasize, scheme of financing,
not an optimal one.
We leave the concept of optimal financing to the theorists.
However, if you want to receive the Nobel Prize,
this is exactly the area where I wish you success.
Financial flow
Now, after we have planned the money flows,
we move on to other documents of the financial plan.
You have already been asked in Paravia about money flows,
cash flow, and what's next.
Money flows are the basis of financial planning,
but in addition to the fact that we make up the money flows,
we also make up the plan balances and the profit plan.
These documents are necessary in order to transfer information,
to exchange information from one form to another.
It is impossible to make up a plan of money flows without a profit plan.
In addition, then, according to the entire set of financial documents,
we can calculate the financial coefficients
corresponding to our strategic goals,
analyze the parameters of profitability and risk
according to the planned and predicted data,
and, if necessary, make changes,
review the planned task,
and then we can extend all our stages of planning,
solutions for all stages of planning,
according to the set strategic parameters,
according to the tactically established standards.
So, we are planning the company balance.
The balance plan is also a table,
a strategic plan, a forecast balance,
which is also a table, different from the accounting form of the balance,
that is, the positions in the balance are all the same,
but the balances are also made up for the entire horizon of planning,
by year, as a rule, by the end of the year,
every planned year, we set out what positions we will have in the balance,
and we will make decisions about investments and financing.
So, in this forecast balance, we will have information
about where the funds came from,
the sources of financing, passives,
how they were used,
look at the slide, the balance scheme,
the asset on the left, the passive on the right,
and in the process of planning, it will be more convenient for us to use the passive for the asset.
So, you see, the logical scheme, what is the balance,
in passives, the sources of financing,
in assets, how they were used, investments,
the passive shows what funds are invested,
what capital is invested,
the asset shows what property the enterprise has,
what other obligations should be in passives,
what is credited to the owners in passives,
their own capital,
we see that we have two components of one whole,
financing and investment.
We see that these are two components of one whole,
There is no investment without financing,
and financing without investment.
Here is our balance,
and two sides are equal in balance,
with equal balance,
with equal amount in the end.
The asset structure,
how do we get the asset structure in the balance,
we transfer all our strategic investment decisions here.
If we buy equipment,
we get the main funds in the balance.
If we use leasing,
we use leasing,
accordingly, our investments are not reflected.
Leasing is already a current aspect of activity,
payments on leasing are reflected in the profit plan,
in the cost, in the second form of accounting.
That is, the assets in the balance are connected with the investment plan,
and with the section of investment activity,
the table of money flows.
The balance assets are built in accordance with the decisions made on financing.
What funds do we use?
Our own capital,
in the form of initial investments,
in the form of fixed capital,
in the form of accumulated profits in the process of activity,
or in the form of borrowed capital,
which we use.
As the enterprise develops,
in addition to external sources,
internal sources are reflected in the enterprise balance,
for example, accumulated profits,
the capital itself increases.
If the enterprise works with losses,
the capital itself is exhausted.
This is an extremely unfavorable situation.
We can use such a balance to calculate financial coefficients.
But not quite in this form,
it is better to use a converted balance.
Financial coefficients are assumed to be a conversion of the balance.
How?
From the passives, the credit debt is transferred to the assets with a minus sign.
As if we said that the credit debt covers our need for turnover capital.
And the turnover assets with the deduction of the credit debt
form a pure turnover capital of the enterprise.
And it is in this form,
as you have on the slide,
an analytical balance,
it shows exactly this balance,
what funds the enterprise has invested in assets,
what capital was used,
and what property the enterprise has.
Here is the balance.
Where and how is the balance presented?
And, of course, you already know the financing rules.
We can control the balance
by comparing the capital itself with non-turnover assets.
The gold financing rule.
Capital itself with borrowed capital.
Horizontally and vertically.
We check the financial stability.
The profit plan.
The most important document.
The profitability of the enterprise was and remains
the most important parameter of the efficiency of the enterprise.
The profit plan includes both the income and the expense positions.
It reflects the current results of the enterprise.
The profit plan is usually made
when the enterprise is created only after the start of the production process.
This reflects the income,
the income from other types of activities,
and the corresponding current costs, costs, expenses.
In order to make up the profit plan,
we use production plans,
marketing plans,
and the corresponding budgetary costs.
We do not consider the budgetary technique within our course.
It is a separate subject, a separate course.
But, of course, there is no financial planning without budgets.
I will ask you to look at the table in detail
how the income and expenses of the enterprise are formed.
It is an expanded table that I have compiled for you in the textbook.
Another interesting point that can be touched upon is our modernity.
How do we plan the revenue?
How do we predict the revenue?
First of all, the growth of the revenue is one of the most important goals of many companies.
A company can set an annual revenue growth of 10%, for example,
or set a goal to achieve a certain revenue in 3 years, 5 years, or more.
To predict the revenue,
you can use a very interesting model of achievable growth.
It is shown on the slide.
The model is quite complex.
You can understand how it works by analyzing the example,
which is provided in the textbook.
This model is derived.
You can trust this model.
It shows how to develop,
how to achieve revenue with certain parameters.
Moreover, you can use any target parameters in this model,
such as a certain profitability,
the turnover of assets,
or a target capital structure in relation to your own and borrowed funds.
The model is very interesting.
Calculations are not difficult.
You can use the electronic tables to see the calculations.
The model is used.
The revenue is calculated.
If the planned revenue calculated by this model is not enough,
does not meet our desires, ambitions, and the accepted strategy,
we must correct the bias,
sacrifice, for example, financial stability,
and increase the share of borrowed capital.
The plan of revenue is a tax instrument.
We determine what taxes we will pay.
The payment of taxes goes from the plan of revenue to the plan of cash flows,
as the position of the flow of payment.
The plan of revenue involves a certain optimization of tax payments.
Financial managers, taking advantage of the accounting policy,
adopt a certain accounting policy,
which is profitable and purposeful at the moment,
use a rich arsenal of revenue maneuvering.
I recommend you to read the books and chapters of Professor Kovalyov
on the issue of revenue management.
It is a very interesting topic of research.
The qualification of a financial manager is related to the possibility of tax payments optimization.
We have already mentioned this.
This includes accelerated monetization, revaluation of the main funds,
the use of leasing, the use of certain accounting methods,
interest rates for credit writing costs, and so on.
It is very interesting and very useful.
Of course, we all do not like to pay taxes,
but we must, because we carry out our activities under the protection of the state,
and the state receives its share of our income from us for this.
Another interesting point that we must take into account,
and I want to draw your attention to, in the framework of the PLAN,
is, of course, the calculation of cost.
Budgeting, budget technology is a separate topic,
but we must take into account the following essential things.
We must remember that we have variable and conditional costs in our expenses.
As soon as we forget about this, we will have distortions,
we will have troubles, we will have a bad planning.
Why?
It is not easy to divide variable and conditional costs by their accounting.
If I ask a student, they will tell me right away,
good students, that variable costs are the main salary,
the main material is the paid salary,
and the conditional costs are rent, amortization.
Yes, it is true.
There are some articles on the current costs that can be attributed to variable and conditional costs,
but we still use the word conditional and conditional more often.
And just to scrupulously divide these costs,
this is variable, this is conditional,
in principle, this is not the main goal.
We need to remember the trends.
We need to understand that the higher the constant costs,
the greater the risk of being in excess.
We remember the actions of the operating lever,
so we must clearly measure our ambitions,
for example, to rent an office in the center of Moscow with the appropriate rent,
and for this we must provide the appropriate turnover,
consulting and the appropriate volume of services provided.
If we forget about constant costs,
if we do not clarify in the planning process,
and even more precisely, if we do not make an element of the analysis of profitability
at the end of the plan,
and such a line as the determination of the profitable volume of sales
and the reserve of financial strength as an assessment of the risk,
we can get into a bad situation,
be in losses when our revenue,
our marginal income,
the revenue will not cover the costs,
and even if the revenue covers the costs,
then, perhaps, the marginal income will not cover our variable costs.
Again, I remind you of the two components, profitability and risk.
Very roughly and in a large way,
in the planning, of course, in terms of the profit in terms of the lines,
when we have a cost, including constant variable costs,
we provide variable costs that change proportionally in terms of revenue.
These variable costs must be justified,
they must have the appropriate standards,
and these standards can be introduced according to the accounting.
The scrupulous planning offers a scrupulous calculation of all the components of variable costs
and the standards of variable costs for the specific indicator,
for the ruble, for the piece, for the ton.
The universal meter is, of course, the variable costs in the calculation for the ruble of revenue.
Current costs are constant variable,
this is a fundamental point.
In addition, there is a very common case
when the current costs and capital costs are mixed.
We are talking about the core moments of profit planning.
Profit is the second part of the balance sheet,
the second form of accounting,
it is associated with the current results of activities.
Only the current costs are reflected in the corresponding costs.
All capital costs, all uniform costs,
they affect the positions of the balance sheet.
What example can be given of a mixture?
A new company is created,
and before the start of the operating processes,
at the moment of the creation of the enterprise,
registration of the enterprise,
there are expenses that seem to be current expenses,
the salary of the accountant.
But in fact, these expenses before the start of the production process
cannot be written off for revenue,
so they are the position of the balance sheet.
Such expenses that seem to be current,
in fact, are capital,
they must be carried out by the corresponding accounting procedures
and reflected in the balance sheet as expenses for the future,
as organizational expenses.
Otherwise, it turns out that there is no revenue,
there are current expenses,
which means that losses are formed in the enterprise,
these losses increase,
they then go into the balance sheet of the enterprise,
they exhaust their own capital,
the net assets of the enterprise are negative,
and with such a balance sheet,
you do not have to count on a loan.
I would like to draw your attention to the division of the concepts
of the results and expenses,
inflows and outflows of funds.
Today we have touched on these concepts in one way or another.
And once again,
we summarize the results and expenses in terms of profit,
inflows and outflows in cash flows.
There is no coarser mistake in economic judgments,
as the academician Novozhilov once said,
than in the mixture of income and expense,
with the result and expenses.
This also happens.
But we have already given examples many times.
Why does the difference between the concept of profit and cash flow arise?
Because we have the results of activity,
for example, revenue,
which is not always an inflow of funds
to the force of the formation of the debtor's debt.
As part of the expenses,
we have a wonderful article
called amortization calculations,
which does not mean outflows.
It is not paid out in the current period.
Amortization calculations accumulate
and affect the financial result.
So, we have considered,
touched on the basics of planning cash flows,
liquidity tables, cash flow,
planned balances,
profit plans.
All these tables are interconnected.
They are made in parallel,
and a separate position goes from one document
to another document,
and is corrected.
For example, we determine the possibility of a loan
by the flow of money.
Finances of loans
affect the position of the balance.
In the profit plan,
after determining the order of financing,
we correct the cost for interest payments.
And, in turn,
calculating the tax on the profit,
we use a new position,
and transfer this position to the cash flow plan.
Only after making a profit
in the cash flow plan
we get a table of tax payments.
Here is a simple example.
This is a professor Zelia,
my teacher.
This is a professor of the University of Bremen.
A simple example of the creation of an enterprise.
We can see the relationship
between finance and accounting.
Let's say,
in the first year we created an enterprise
and invested our own capital.
Here we see the investment of our own capital
in the balance.
We have this money on the account,
in the assets, in the passives,
as a fixed capital.
And it is reflected as a flow of funds
in terms of liquidity.
The net cash flow is plus 40.
In the next year,
in the next period,
we buy machines and equipment
for the money we have
and create a reserve of return funds.
You can see the change in the balance position
and the change in the position of the inflows and outflows.
In terms of liquidity,
negative saldo is formed,
negative net cash flow,
which means a decrease in the money
on the account.
Look, 0 was 40,
net cash flow minus 40,
it became 0.
We have specially stretched it a little
for clarity.
Yes, usually these processes are parallel,
especially when we talk about an operating enterprise.
It is just more convenient to look at these points
to create an enterprise.
And finally, in the third period,
we start the process of manufacturing goods,
selling goods,
and, accordingly,
the positions of the profit plan appear.
Profit is formed,
tax is formed,
inflows and outflows of funds are changed.
I would like to draw your attention to the outflows of funds.
We reflect the cost of the amortization payments.
In the profit plan,
we have the total cost of 53 units.
In the balance,
we also have new positions,
the profit tax of this period.
Here, while reflected as a budget calculation,
the profit tax will be paid in the next period.
And the next year,
we continue the production process,
taxes are paid,
revenue from the implementation as an outflow of funds is received.
We pay for our current use of resources.
And since we planned everything well,
everything is correct,
we are constantly increasing the currency balance.
We are getting richer.
Thus, we have considered all the processes and documents
of long-term financial planning.
How to make a profit plan,
how to make a profit plan,
how to make balances.
According to these documents,
the leaders of the upper and middle links
can assess
how the company will generate a pure money flow,
what needs will appear in investments
and external financing,
and when it will appear,
at what time.
Then we will be able to assess the possibility
and terms of payment of interest,
repayment of debt.
We can monitor the change in the balance value of property
according to the predicted balance,
how the structure of capital will change.
We will definitely take measures
to optimize tax payments,
we will plan the payment of dividends.
And in the end,
we will predict and calculate the financial state,
assess profitability and risk of activity
in standard indicators.
We will now consider the specifics
of short-term planning.
It consists of assessing the current needs
in financial funds
and determining short-term sources of financing.
Please look at the slide.
From the previous table of financial sources,
short-term sources,
external and internal sources,
are highlighted.
External sources of financing
are loans and loans,
and debt to suppliers and contractors,
credit debt.
Internal sources are debt on taxes and fees,
and loans on fees,
invoices, and interest.
Short-term sources of financing
are also overdrafts,
commodity loans.
The definition of the current needs
in short-term financial funds
is carried out
using a special table of money flows
called the cash flow plan.
We emphasize that this is a short-term plan.
It is a short-term plan
that is not a cash flow plan,
but a short-term plan.
The cash flow plan is a short-term plan
that is not a cash flow plan.
Please look at the slide.
The main contents of the cash flow plan
are presented.
The cash flow plan includes
sales receipts,
operating payments,
payment of supplies,
and all this
is short-term.
The cash flow plan is a short-term plan
that is not a cash flow plan.
Now let's look at
the routine planning processes
of the business.
Again,
we have a simplified example.
We have the accounting data
for December.
The next slide, please.
We have a sales receipts forecast
for January, February, and March.
We can see
what is planned for us.
The revenue from the implementation
is planned to be sold
at 250, 200,
and 250 units per month.
at 250, 200, and 250 units per month.
Moreover,
we let go of the vast majority
of goods on credit.
We receive only a small amount of goods,
10%,
at the moment.
You can see
how we have the
revenue plan ratio,
the revenue plan ratio,
the implementation plan,
and the sales receipts plan.
The December implementation
in the amount of
350 cash units
is due in January.
And only 25 units,
10% of 250,
we receive
in this period.
Next,
we have to plan
the sales receipts plan
in accordance with the planned
sales receipts.
The sales receipts are calculated
for our revenue,
for our sales volume
in the amount of
80, 100, and 140 cash units.
All sales receipts
are implemented
with a payment period
of a month.
We pay for the sales receipts
in December in January,
in January in February,
in February in March.
These inconsistencies
in the payment and
the payment and the payment
receipts, we have planned
in the long-term plan
within the framework of the
turnover capital calculation,
very largely.
Here, when we make
the cash receipts,
we plan in this way.
You can see the final cash receipts plan
on this slide.
Here, the balance of cash
receipts,
receipts and payments,
and the balance of receipts
and payments increases
the balance of cash receipts
at the end of the period.
We planned more or less successfully here,
we have no problems.
But if the cash receipts plan shows
a deficit of cash,
then it is necessary to provide
short-term financing.
This is due to additional
interest payments.
As an alternative,
you can use the cash receipts plan
to put things in order
and provide some transfers
between receipts and payments.
The cash receipts plan allows
to predict the moment
when we will have a short-term
financing and choose the optimal
way to meet this need.
And if we have
super-normal cash receipts,
we must
within the framework of
management and optimization of
these receipts, put the free
and super-normal
receipts into liquid value
securities.
But since we work in a very
uncertain structure,
when we can always make some
changes,
we have a special function
of planning,
a sign of planning,
adaptability of planning.
We must flexibly
anticipate all these changes.
When we have planned
some parameters,
indicators,
we must always keep in mind
that there will be a need
to review them.
Flexibility of planning,
adaptability of planning
and the possibility of
making adjustments.
It is very convenient
to use electronic tables
for this.
It is cheap, fast
to review the entire planning process,
to put everything in order,
to review the planned task,
to see what we have in the end
and to form an optimal
plan that satisfies
both the owners and managers.
A plan
that will not
cause doubts
when creditors need it.
Today we have covered
the conceptual basis, essence
and features of financial planning.
In the first chapter
we have identified the target parameters
of planning,
learned to divide long-term
and short-term planning,
strategy and tactics of the company.
We have considered the processes
of forecasting of money flows
as a basis for ensuring
financial balance.
This is the subject of the current planning.
We have considered
the main methods of managing
the company to optimize
the tax payments.
We have considered
the methods of forecasting
the needs in investments,
the sources of financing.
We remember the rules
of financing,
we remember the risk that lies
behind making every decision
about investments and financing.
Then we have touched
on short-term planning.
We have considered the technique
of cash flow planning,
the necessary technique,
the useful one,
which we can use every day.
Thus, we have highlighted
and, in general,
we have implemented
the problem of financial planning
as a necessity of the current
and operational monitoring of plans
to optimize the financial cycle.